Create your first document

Open Texmaker and click on **File, New**. Then put the following code:

`\documentclass{article} \begin{document} Hello, world! \end{document}`

Now save the document as a _tex_ file going to **File, Save**. Finally, compile the document clicking on **Tools, PDFLaTeX**. Make sure the PDF file has been created and it's working. And that's it! You've created your first LaTeX document!

==================

Here are a dozen of our LaTeX practices.  

1. No absolute references. When we reference a part, chapter, section, subsection, theorem, lemma, corollary, figure, table, formula, line of pseudocode, exercise, problem, page, or anything else numbered, we always use the \label and \ref commands. Our practice for the string in the label is a two- or three-character type, followed by a descriptive name. For example, the label for the chapter on red-black trees is ch:red-black-trees, and the label for the Master Theorem is thm:master.
2. Our bibliography is large, and we need a way to manage the keys in the BibTeX file. Our system is that the key is the full last name of the first author, followed by the first two letters of the last names of each succeeding author, followed by two digits for the publication year, followed by a single lower-case letter only if necessary to disambiguate. For example, if we were citing our own third edition, the key would be CormenLeRiSt09. I'll add that I don't know what text editor my coauthors currently use, but I've been using emacs for 30 years, and it has a BibTeX mode that's quite helpful.  
      
    Addendum, November 16, 2014: Whenever you insert something into your bibliography, make sure that you have the source in your possession, or at least that you recorded the bibliographic information directly from the source. Never copy a bibliographic entry from another source, even if it's an author citing his or her own work. That's how bibliography errors propagate. Yes, I have seen authors cite their own work incorrectly. It really happens. And creating a BibTeX entry is not enough. You must read how the bibliography came out in your paper, or in whatever you're writing. You might think that you know how it will come out, but BibTeX can act in strange ways. As I tell my students over and over (and over and over …): RTFB: Read The Bibliography!  
    
3. We try to avoid using the \frac command inline. There might be a place or two where we couldn't avoid it, but almost all the time we use \frac, it's in a math display.
4. Math is always part of a sentence, even if it's in a display. Punctuate it as such. When a punctuation mark (usually a period or comma) follows a math display, we put a space before it, so that the display ends with \ . or \ , (that's backslash-space-period and backslash-space-comma). That way, the reader is less likely to think that the punctuation is part of the math itself. We don't put the space before punctuation when math appears inline because it would just look weird.
5. I'm a stickler for getting space right at the ends of sentences. TeX assumes that a stop (period, question mark, or exclamation point) ends a sentence, unless it follows an uppercase letter or an uppercase letter followed by a right parenthesis. (There might be other parts of the rule that I'm forgetting here.) TeX leaves a little extra space after a sentence (unless you've invoked the \frenchspacing command). When a sentence ends with an uppercase letter, or an uppercase letter followed by a right parenthesis, we put \@ before the stop. When a period follows a lowercase letter that does not end the sentence, we put backslash-space after the period.
6. The question mentioned our use of nonbreaking spaces. We don't let math start a line, unless it's a long enough expression. If we have a sequence A, B, and C, where the items are short, we enter it as A, B, and~C.
7. We don't allow overfull lines. The \sloppy and \fussy commands are our friends.
8. We try not to use a math symbol that has a type without giving the type, unless we've given the type very recently. For example, we'll say vertex~$v$ rather than just $v$, unless we've mentioned that $v$ is a vertex earlier in the sentence, or perhaps in one of the two previous sentences. You can probably find several places where we failed to observe this convention, but we tried to be good about it.
9. For pseudocode, I created a LaTeX package, clrscode3e.sty. You can download the package and its documentation at [http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~thc/clrscode/](http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~thc/clrscode/ "www.cs.dartmouth.edu"). One thing I'll warn you about is to never typeset a multiletter name directly in math mode. If you type $shuffle$, the output will look terrible. At the very least, you should use \mathit. I made a macro \id for typesetting identifiers, and it works in and out of math mode. My \id macro has the advantage that, even in math mode, a hyphen in the name typesets as a hyphen and not as a minus sign. I'll also warn you that because I'm a stickler for getting spacing right, I made a set of macros for attributes in the object-like notation we switched to in the third edition. So instead of typing $x.\id{left}$, we type $\attrib{x}{left}$, which puts the right amount of space around the dot. Why am I such a stickler for getting the typesetting right? Two reasons. First, my father was a printer and I used to work for him over the summer. It had to be right. Second, my Ph.D. advisor was my coauthor, Charles Leiserson, and if you know Charles, you know what I mean.
10. All 223 figures were drawn by me, using MacDraw Pro. It's legacy software, running only on pre-Intel Macs. But I like it better than anything that's come down the pike since the mid-1990s, and so I keep around a couple of old Macs so that I can run it. One problem with newer drawing programs, such as Illustrator, is that their output is incompatible with the psfrag package of LaTeX, and we rely on psfrag for figures with any sort of complicated math in them.
11. Macros for everything. We made macros for all math constructs, such as \expect for expected values. We made a macro \defn for where we define terms; it produces bold italic text, but we could easily change how definitions appear because we made a macro for them. If there's a logical reason to typeset something in a certain way, we made a macro for it.
12. I made the index, and the windex program that Ron Rivest wrote was immensely helpful. If you're going to make an index, do it right. Our files have 5947 \index commands in them.