Got a chance to read a nice article in plos one entitled “An Efficiency Comparison of Document Preparation Systems Used in Academic Research and Development” by Markus Knauff and Jelica Nejasmic from the University of Giessen, Germany (DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0115069).

It is one of the top 25 articles of 2015 listed by Scientific American (Oct, 16 Issue). The one line is LaTeX vs MS Word. Which one is the best for academic writing? The study was conducted using volunteers, specialized or well versed either in Word or LaTeX. The participants were requested to typeset three different kinds of a journal page and at the end they were requested to answer an questionnaire.

A complete text page with different size of headings and paragraphs were given for the first typesetting experiment. A page consists of tables and texts were given as the second experiment and a page with complex mathematical equation was given for the third. All the pages were extracted from a German journal Kognitionswissenschaft. Parameters such as number of words typesetted in a given time, formating errors, typos and grammatical errors were considered to estimate the typesetting efficiency. They conclude, LaTeX users are slower than MS Word users (MSWU) and they have more typos than MSWU. Their productivity largely affects with usage and even the tables produced by LaTeX users are not as good as MSWU. But the LaTeX user's excelled in producing mathematical equations and they're the most satisfied ones with their final output and they feel less tensed and less frustrated while using their package than the MSWU. So, even though the overall quality of the LaTeX document is good, since its affects the productivity of the user and considering the typos it could be considered only for the texts heavily loaded with mathematical equations. Since the researchers are mostly funded by federal agencies, which obviously means the money of the people, wasting time in a less productive software like LaTeX should be avoided.

They explained the high satisfactory feeling of LaTeX users in terms of cognitive dissonance (Each individual has a motivational drive to seek consonance between their beliefs and their actual actions. If a belief set does not concur with the individual’s actual behavior, then it is usually easier to change the belief rather than the behavior). Which means that since LaTeX users believe their software is perfect, they tends to be more satisfied than the MSWU.

The results are really surprising me. I'm using both the packages for a while and my personal experiences are exactly opposite to this one (In case if you ask me to rate the WYSIWYG editors I would place Word only after LibreOffice and WPS office). So, I hope the authors really missed something while judging the results. First of all, they use single papers rather than a complex texts like articles for the experiment. Even Though I'm good with LaTeX, I always consider Word for typesetting letters because it is not necessary to define all the parameters, margins, fonts for just a simple letter. LaTeX is for a Big Match not for the street cricket. Anyone who typeset their thesis in Word know its limitations, if you alter a word or line, it is possible to affect the entire document. Secondly, the LaTeX users of the experiment are not using any style files. I know somebody who can write their own styles files (that includes myself!). Those people also (like any LaTeX user) copy the preamble from an old file. This applies to tables and figures. So when you blankly typing the preamble and table texts I'm sure even the experienced user should also struggle and this might be understood as large formatting errors and slower typesetting speed. Typos are agreeable because Word processor has an well built Spell and Grammatical checker and the open source editors are not so as elite as word. But the point is that they are evolving. Anyone who used LibreOffice and Word during the XP era may understands what I mean. Current LibreOffice 5 package is much more sophisticated than current Word.

Finally, considering cognitive dissonance, I wonder don't the Word users have the same feeling? Why are they less satisfied? May be the results are very obvious, that the MSWU are using Word since they don't have choices or alternatively since in LaTeX the output is something different from the authors input, it may makes them happy (Like getting salary for the work). One great missing part that the authors didn't discussed is handling bibliography. I bet, no word processor can match that with LaTeX. Formatting to different journal requirements are much easier in LaTeX, just by changing the few lines at the top and bottom, you're ready for your next submission which is not possible with Word. So, much more clear investigation is required to properly address the LaTeX vs MS Word issue rather than concluding it from few page experiment. Upto that long live LaTeX!

=====================================

Because we really, really have more important things to do than having to deal with formatting.

For instance, scientists need to reformat a lot. If my article isn’t accepted by the Guadalajara Journal of Luminescent Fungi, I might have to resubmit it to the Quarterly Reports of the Szechuan Luminiferious Fungi Research Society. What would be an absolute pain in Word is as simple as changing two lines in a LaTeX document.

We also like consistency. LaTeX includes a very broad ecosystem. I have just completed a 110k word book, and not once have I had to worry about reference style. I’ve worried more about referencing for a 2,500 word essay in undergraduate years than I have for all of a full-length book.

Then there are the tools. For instance, I’ve mentioned my book. About half of the 200 or so illustrations are flow diagrams. They were all made in TikZ, a specification language for vector graphics. I don’t have to worry about sending the right resolution, or about fixing typos. TikZ is a text file, and if I have to make changes, I can do so easily.

I’ve written the whole book in a text format, so I was able to make use of version management. I have been good at committing my changes to Github, so I can go back in time to just about any day of work and see what I’ve changed. Yesterday, I’ve realised I really didn’t like my abbreviating rewrite of a chapter, so I just went back two months to the original and restored it. Try doing that with Word!

Speaking of Github: having promised to deliver a book, I have spent exactly zero minutes worrying about losing my work. As an undergraduate, I would wake up at night in cold sweat, worried that my essay would be gone. I would be saving endless copies on flash drives. Now? I have written my entire book online on a service called Overleaf, and checked my work in every day to Github, with automated copies every day saved onto an FTP server. The world could end, my work would persist.

If you’re a scientist in the data science or computer science fields or any of the adjacent realms of science, you will realise just how inadequate Word is for doing science. Learning LaTeX is a bit of an effort, but for those for whom it is right, it will be well worth it.


=============================


For me, using Word is painful. Most of the things it has as “features" aren't useful to me, and the keystrokes aren't (or weren't when I last had to use it) reconfigurable.

I use the same editor for documents as I do for code — the environment and key strokes work equally well no matter what I am doing.

It isn't just people who use LaTeX that dislike Word. Word produces very basic documents, does not produce book quality typesetting, and many academic journals have software that converts word documents into LaTeX documents. Academic journals *care* about how a document looks, and in mathematics or physics, for example, exact presentation of the text can really matter.

Of course LaTeX can also do superb graphs, charts, tables, and such, as well as incorporate other graphic media.

Personally, I hate to use any mouse-based editor with buttons and menus you have to navigate through — they are slow and rely a lot on visual memory (something I am not good at). I type *so* much faster than I can take my hand away from the keyboard, move the mouse to the correct location, click the correct tab, and drag the pointer down to the right place and click it … and moderately often, there will either be a field to fill in with the keyboard, or some other mouse action required.

It is just plain inefficient, and isn't able to do the things I expect from a document production pipeline.


==========================

The first reason, versioning, is obvious in my field (and you have mentioned it too). With some little effort, even branching and merging could be made to work, which would be the primary reason for me. The other reasons are:

1. Reliability. I run LATEX and get an identical output every time. My experience with Word in this regard isn't as good - sometimes Word produces garbled output, or an output in which chapter numbering is wrong (when printing or exporting to PDF). One needs to manually review the output file before handing it out, which is tedious.
2. Backward compatibility. I'm maintaining a documentation for a software system which has been in use for over ten years. This documentation has been created years ago in then current version of Word and has been updated ever since. It went through various other Word versions. The problem is, Word documents age. We encounter various strange errors (wrong chapter numbering, normal paragraphs appearing in TOC, copy/paste garbling entire document) which aren't reproducible in files created freshly. Unfortunately, when copying/pasting the text from a problematic document to a fresh one, the contagion get copied over too. And I can't see what is inside, since the format is binary and proprietary. Some workarounds help a little bit (eg. saving the file as rtf and then back as doc or docx), but it is tedious and doesn't solve everything. In LATEXthis isn't going to happen. Everything that gets into a LATEX- file has been explicitly put there by someone and can be easily reviewed and updated (if need be) to match newer packages.
3. References. I got to the point where I'm avoiding references in Word like plague. Somehow, references get broken all the time. I wasn't able to pinpoint the exact cause, but whenever I open an older Word file, I usually find a broken reference. It is sometimes very difficult to find out what the broken reference should point to and what did it look like (was it a chapter number, a title or something else?) This isn't going to happen in LATEX- , you get warning for broken references and can handle them when they happen without explicitly looking for them in PDFs. Plus, you can assign meaningful names to references.
4. Organization. Tried to split a big Word file into several smaller ones and include them in the big one. It didn't work. Then I read on a blog of some Microsoft Valued Professional stating that included files don't work in Word, and never tried it again (perhaps they fixed it recently, but who knows?) In LATEX, splitting the document into smaller bits is a breeze.

There are other less significant reasons, but these are most important. It looks to me that they would be relevant to researchers as well.

I'd also say that writing text in LATEX isn't difficult, it certainly doesn't require a lot of packages and/or googling, especially once the basic setup is done. On the other hand, doing graphics in LATEX (eg. using the TikZ package) is fiendishly difficult (in my opinion). Sometimes it probably is worth the trouble, but it can always be avoided.