What makes good writing good and bad writing bad? Here are some notions that are important to me.

No such immunity is granted the nonfiction writer. He can do all kinds of things wrong. He is endlessly accountable: to the facts, to the people he is writing about, to his “quotes,” to the mood, to the ethical nuances of the story. He is also accountable to his readers. They won’t put up with being delayed, lost, confused, bored or taken down unnecessary trails by failures of craft.

it’s a model of linear writing, leading the reader across rocky new terrain in steps of clarity and logic. Jeremy Campbell never fails to ask: “What would a novice need to know next? How can I explain it in the way that would be easiest to grasp?” the need to protect the integrity of the message. In information parlance, the enemy is “noise”—a perfect word for all the random interferences with what man or nature is trying to say. Noise is the typographical error and the poorly designed page and the caption that doesn’t quite explain what’s happening in the picture. Noise is handwriting that’s hard to read. Noise is distortion on the TV screen. Noise is the lapse of memory, the slip of the tongue, the wrong neuron fired by the brain—anything that brings disorder to the intended order of a message. So pervasive is noise, disorder being such a strong natural force, that nature has evolved an infinite number of backup systems for getting messages to their destination “more or less in the original form,” as Campbell puts it. “In nearly all forms of communication, more messages are sent than are strictly necessary to convey the information intended by the sender.” Certainly writing is one of the main endeavors where disorder is more common than order.

I found it consoling after all these years to learn that writers are up against nothing less than the fundamental anarchy of the universe; entropy, prince of disorder, is sprinkling noise on everything we write. Ambiguity is noise. Redundancy is noise. Misuse of words is noise. Vagueness is noise. Jargon is noise. Pomposity is noise. Clutter is noise: all those unnecessary adjectives (“ongoing progress”), all those unnecessary adverbs (“successfully avoided”), all those unnecessary prepositions draped onto verbs (“order up”), all those unnecessary phrases (“in a very real sense”). Information is your sacred product, and noise is its pollutant.

Obscurity being one of the deadly sins, anyone might suppose that serious people would labor mightily to avoid it in their writing.  Not for them the short words and active verbs and concrete details of ordinary speech; they believe that a simple style is the sign of a simple mind. Actually a simple style is the result of harder thinking and harder work than they are willing or able to do.

“Although there is no substitute for merit in writing,” White says, “clarity comes closest to being one. Even to a writer who is being intentionally obscure or wild of tongue we can say, ‘Be obscure clearly! Be wild of tongue in a way we can understand!’”

I can’t handle an A-plus mind expressing itself in C-minus sentences. I believe too strongly that mind and language are inseparable. If we violate our language we violate ourselves.

In writing, short is usually better than long. Short words and sentences are easier for the eye and the mind to process than long ones, and an article that makes its case succinctly is the highest form of courtesy to the reader. Somehow it never occurs to sloppy writers that they are being fundamentally rude. Most pieces can be cut by 50 percent without losing any substance. Brevity is one sign of a well-organized mind. 

Jargon is the lingo of people in specialized fields who have infected each other with their private terminology and don’t think there’s any other way to say what they mean. Somewhere they forgot about the mother tongue. There’s almost no subject that can’t be made accessible in good English. Jargon, of course, takes a multitude of forms. The two preceding examples are typical of the buzzwords—mostly nouns—that infest such fields as management, banking, insurance, education and government. They are words that make the insider feel important when he uses them but that don’t really mean anything. An outsider can only try to translate and hope for the best—a task made harder by the tendency of fad nouns to attach themselves to other fad nouns. no human activity that I could visualize. 

More often jargon consists of special terms that every occupation has found it necessary to invent. Used with restraint, they aren’t jargon; they are the working tools of a particular field, and if they serve a specific need we have no trouble learning new ones overnight: words like “amniocentesis” and “gentrification” and “superconductivity.” The trouble arises when jargon becomes a crutch—when its users become so dependent on their private terminology that they claim they can’t express themselves in any other way. any specialist who doesn’t clean up his jargon when he’s writing for the general population deserves to be, if not tarred, at least feathered by the mob.

If clear writing is one of the foundations of a democratic society, don’t count on getting it from men and women with a college degree. Ivy League alumni magazines are awash with letters so grammatically squalid that they barely make sense. Clean-up time at this toxic dump has to start at the top.

The words are refreshingly short; they instantly appeal to the eye and make us want to read them. More important, all the nouns are working nouns: they denote objects (bread) or activities (race, battle) or attainments (riches, favor) or conditions of fate (time, chance) that we can relate to our own lives. Good writing is specific and concrete.

One way to take the mush out of concept nouns is to turn them into active verbs. Verbs are the strongest tools a writer is given, because they embody an action. Active verbs are stronger than passive verbs, because they propel a sentence forward. They also enable us to picture who did what, because they require a pronoun or a noun: “I,” “we,” “she,” “you,” “boy,” “girl.” Seeing a pronoun or a noun and an active verb together, we visualize a specific event that occurred at a specific moment. Active verbs are a writer’s best friend. Not every concept noun can be turned into an active verb. But how many people are even trying?

Writing is not unlike the schoolroom period called “show and tell.” The writer should not only tell a story; he should try to make the reader see what he is writing about. As Mailer demonstrates, active verbs are ideal for this kind of work; they force us to witness an event. But nouns are equally pictorial and helpful. I’m not talking (needless to say) about concept nouns. I mean the thousands of simple nouns, like “house” and “chair” and “earth” and “tree,” that denote the objects of everyday life and the properties of the world we live in. Unlike the long concept nouns, which tend to be of Latin origin and to end in “ion,” these are Anglo-Saxon words—short, blunt, homely and infinitely old. They are words that are in our bones and that resonate with emotions, whether we want them to or not. A writer who uses these nouns makes instant contact with the humanity of his reader by giving him a familiar picture.

Writing is a craft, and a writer is someone who goes to work every day with his tools, like the carpenter or the television repairman, no matter how he feels, and if one of the things he wants to produce by 6 P.M. is a sense of enjoyment in his writing, he must generate it by an act of will. Nobody else is going to do it for him.

wrote clearly because the act of writing and rewriting made them think clearly, organized their ideas, told them what they knew and what they still needed to know, and pushed them to new areas of knowledge.