It’s not enough for a nonfiction writer to just write good, clean sentences; he must organize those sentences into a coherent shape, taking the reader on a complicated trip—often with several flashbacks—without losing him or boring him. too many facts would kill the reader’s enjoyment of the adventure itself.

Whenever I embark on a story so overloaded with good material I despair of ever getting to the end—of covering all the ground I know I’ll need to cover to tell the story right. In my gloom it helps me to remember two things. One is that writing is linear and sequential. If sentence B logically follows sentence A, and if sentence C logically follows sentence B, I’ll eventually get to sentence Z. I also try to remember that the reader should be given only as much information as he needs and not one word more.

Prior knowledge of the subject, incidentally, isn’t a requirement; only the ability to arrange information in narrative order. After that came the hard part: wrestling my new-found education into a narrative that moved logically from A to Z. The only thing I knew at the beginning was how I wanted the article to end.

Every preceding sentence was slow labor: the steady accretion of detail and the equally steady removal of whatever I had put in that I realized wasn’t doing necessary work or that the reader could figure out for himself. (I had learned by long travail a far from obvious lesson: Readers must be given room to bring their own emotions to a piece so crammed with emotional content; the writer must tenaciously resist explaining why the material is so moving.)

One thing I did last term was to ask students to write a paper in the last five minutes of class, summarizing what I had said in my lecture. It helps them to find out whether they understood what I was talking about.

“In my first assignment I asked them to write a paper on ‘What are the most important goals of United States policy?’ It was a values statement—something nobody had ever asked them to write before; usually students are only asked to describe or to analyze: ‘Write an essay on the Declaration of Independence.’ 

Well, their papers were a disaster. They rambled all over. They couldn’t formulate a goal or a policy except in the most generalized way—‘better communications,’ ‘world peace’—and in almost every case the comment I found myself making was: ‘I don’t understand this.’

I tried to get them to use writing to focus their thoughts on specific ideas and issues. I told them I’d be grading their papers for clarity, common sense, logic, plausibility and precision, not for the content of their views. At the end of the term I gave them the same assignment on goals and policies. This time their papers were clear and explicit. Their problems were in thinking, not in the mechanics of writing.”

The humanities and the social sciences also rely heavily on tests that measure a student’s learning by what he knows, not by how he got to know it.

It compels us by the repeated effort of language to go after those thoughts and to organize them and present them clearly. It forces us to keep asking, “Am I saying what I want to say?” Very often the answer is “No.” It’s a useful piece of information.

“It gets them to write for their peers and not for the teacher,” he told me, “and what they learned was a revelation to them. They learned by the presence or absence of response to what they had written. The good paper raised all the right questions, and on those days the paper would teach the class. The poor paper was instantly noticeable. There wouldn’t be much in it to discuss—there’d be no place to start, or it was so unclear that we’d have to go back over it and try to figure out what it was about. It made everybody in the class realize that a piece of writing is a piece of thinking. By the end of the term all the students said how much better they understood a subject by having to write about it.”

It’s elegant in the sense of a geometric argument: Everything that needs to be there is there, and the essay has nothing in it that doesn’t support the argument.

“The value of a baccalaureate education for nurses today,” said Professor Miller, “is that it helps them to become leaders and decision-makers and advocates. “We push our nurses to be agents of change on health issues: everything from seat belts to day care to the right of employees to know about hazardous substances in their work environment. We’re trying to make our nurses more socially aware and more politically astute.

make their students do extensive reading and writing. “We’re pushing them into the literature”. “Among other things, we ask them to make a search of the pertinent journals and then to choose one article that particularly interests them and to write an annotated summary of it. It expands their thinking and raises further questions that they ought to be asking. It’s exciting to work with our students on their successive drafts. A wonderful thing happens when they realize they don’t have to write in isolation—that they have a colleague who will go over their work with them—and when a section that had been giving them trouble just falls into place on the next draft.”

it was the most natural thing in the world that they had made reading and writing an integral part of their nursing courses. How else will we get the kind of nurses we need to make a difference in a society groping for decent health care?

=====================

Once again I was struck by one of the miracles of the cognitive process—that the act of writing will summon from the buried past exactly what we need exactly when we need it. Memory and intuition and chance associations will always generate a certain percentage of what any writer writes. The remainder is generated by reason.

Therefore, for the purposes of this book, I’ll generalize outrageously and state that there are two kinds of writing. One is explanatory writing: writing that transmits existing information or ideas. Call it Type A writing. The other is exploratory writing: writing that enables us to discover what we want to say. Call it Type B. They are equally valid and useful.

As a teacher I’ve concentrated on Type A writing because it’s so badly needed. We are a society paralyzed by the inability to convey routine information—the inability of the executive to explain company policy in a memo to the staff, of the employee to explain his new idea in a proposal to the boss, of the bank to explain its “simplified” new bank statement to the customer, of the manufacturer to explain in a consumer manual how its product works, of the health and insurance professions to explain in a brochure how to get reimbursed for being sick, of the educator to explain in a letter how the school is educating our children, of the Internal Revenue Service to explain on its new tax form how to fill it out. Type A writing is what most people need to get through the day, both as writers and as readers. Its sole purpose is to inform; it has no deeper content that the writer will discover in the act of writing.

My advice to Type A writers begins with one word: Think! Ask yourself, “What do I want to say?” Then try to say it. Then ask yourself, “Have I said it?” Put yourself in the reader’s mind: Is your sentence absolutely clear to someone who knows nothing about the subject? If not, think about how to make it clear. Then rewrite it. Then think: “What do I need to say next? Will it lead logically out of what I’ve just written? Will it also lead logically toward where I want to go?” If it will, write the sentence. Then ask yourself, “Did it do the job I wanted it to do, with no ambiguity?” If it did, think: “Now what does the reader need to know?” Keep thinking and writing and rewriting. If you force yourself to think clearly you will write clearly. It’s as simple as that. The hard part isn’t the writing; the hard part is the thinking.

Type B writing—exploratory writing—requires no such cogitation, no prior decisions about which road to take; the road will reveal itself. Today many of America’s best writing teachers believe that this is the only kind of writing worth teaching, especially to young children. Unlike Type A writing, which they consider mainly a technical skill, Type B writing is a voyage of discovery into the self. Only by going into uncharted territory, they feel, can a writer find his potential and his voice and his meaning. Meaning, in fact, doesn’t exist until a writer goes looking for it.

I don’t entirely buy that theory because I think both types of writing are necessary for survival and fulfillment. But I like the humanism behind it—the idea that writing is a means of growth and that it should never be without elements of joy and wonder. Nor do I think Type B writers are exempt from the laws of grammar and order. However subconsciously they may stumble on what they want to say, they are finally as obligated as every other writer to make themselves understood. “Free writing” is a search mechanism, not a license to let it all hang out.
