Untuk menjaga keberadaaan konsumen dan produsen maka intervensi kebijakan pemerintah dalam bentuk ekonomi makro diperlukan, yakni berupa penetapan harga dasar dan harga atap. “Harga dasar adalah harga terendah yang ditetapkan terhadap suatu produk, sedangkan harga atap adalah harga tertinggi yang ditetapkan terhadap suatu produk”. Harga dasar berfungsi untuk melindungi produsen dari penurunan harga yang signifikan karena berlimpahnya bahan baku biomassa, sementara harga atap berfungsi melindungi konsumen dari melambungnya harga jual listrik biomassa karena tingginya biaya produksi listrik.
Pemerintah melalui kebijakan energinya terus mengembangkan dan mengoptimalkan penggunaan EBT sebagai energi alternatif guna mengurangi ketergantungan pada energi fosil dan menargetkan energi nasional dengan porsi EBT minimal 23% pada tahun 2025 serta meningkat menjadi 31% pada tahun 2050 sesuai yang tertuang dalam Peraturan Pemerintah No.79/2014 tentang Kebijakan Energi Nasional.

Since 2006 a number of policies have been established to stimulate investment in and development of bioenergy and its feedstocks. Key biofuel policies established in 2006 included the following:
•• Presidential Regulation No. 5/2006, on Indonesia’s national energy policy, calls for biofuels to make up 2% of the energy mix by 2010 and 5% by 2025, totaling 22.26 billion liters of biodiesel, bioethanol and bio-oil. The overall aim of this policy was to safeguard the national economic interest by improving domestic energy security (Dillon et al. 2008).
•• Presidential Instruction No. 1/2006 to 13 central and regional government institutions, on supply and use of biofuels as an alternative energy source, requires relevant government departments to support and promote the establishment of a domestic biofuel industry.
•• Presidential Decree No. 10/2006 established a national biofuels task force (Timnas BBN) to coordinate biofuel industry expansion. The task force consists of a steering committee, organizing committee and working groups on various themes, such as policy and regulations, land procurement, cultivation and production, markets, and infrastructure. It is required to (1) design a blueprint for biofuel production to accelerate poverty alleviation and job creation, (2) design a road map for biofuel development, (3) prepare the technical implementation of biofuel and set up an institutional task force, (4) evaluate biofuel development and its potential to alleviate poverty and create jobs and (5) periodically report on biofuel development to the president (Jupesta et al. 2011a).

Investment in biofuel feedstock plantations was also encouraged in the following regulations:
•• Ministry of Agriculture Decree (No. 33/ Permentan/OT.140/7/2006) aims to promote the development of estate crop plantations through expansion, regeneration and rehabilitation. This initiative gave farmers access to credit at preferential rates to develop plantations.
•• Law concerning investment (No. 25/2007) allows companies to lease land for plantation development for up to 60 years and to have this extended for another 35 years. Prior to this regulation, companies were only able to obtain rights to cultivate land (hak guna usaha) for 35 years and to have this extended for another 25 years. The regulation also allowed investors to obtain a right to construct and use buildings such as agricultural processing plants (hak guna bangunan) for 50 years, with a possible extension of another 30 years. Formerly, this right could be granted for only 30 years with a possible extension of 20 years.
•• Ministry of Agriculture Decree No. 26/Permentan/ Ot.140/2/2007 provides guidelines on obtaining estate crop licenses for biofuel feedstocks. It states that a company can obtain a plantation license covering up to 100,000 ha for oil palm, 150,000 ha for sugarcane and 50,000 ha for jatropha, and double those amounts in Papua. This regulation was followed by a Ministry of Forestry decree (No. P22/Menhut-II/2009) that stipulated that up to 100,000 ha of forest land could be converted to plantations, but the clearance permits would only be given in allotments of 20,000 ha. This allocation could be doubled for West Papua and Papua.
•• Government Regulation No. 10/2010, concerning the procedure for changing forest status and functions, states that convertible production forests can be converted to accommodate development needs, while ensuring that the remaining forest cover is sufficient. This regulation essentially allows companies to argue a case for converting forest to biofuel plantations. It also allows forest areas designated for conservation, protection or production to be changed if they no longer meet the biophysical conditions of these forest functions. For example, conservation and protection forest can be changed to production forest if it no longer meets the criteria for conservation. Permanent and limited production forests can also be changed to convertible production forests so that oil palm plantations can apply for a forest release permit. In other words, the regulation potentially allows oil palm investors to gain access to land falling within the state-owned forest that was previously off limits.
•• Government Regulation No. 60/2012, on procedures for conversion of allocation and functions of forest areas (an amendment to Government Regulation No. 10/2012), and Government Regulation No. 61/2012, on forest utilization (an amendment to Government Regulation No. 24/2010 on forest area utilization), stipulate that mining and palm oil businesses that started operations before the enactment of the Law on Spatial Planning and Forest Utilization Permits in 2007 can acquire and own their concessions within forest lands. Articles 51A and 51B of Government Regulation No. 61/2012 offered oil palm plantation and mining companies a six-month window of opportunity (through 6 January 2013) to apply to the Ministry of Forestry for forest land release approvals in convertible production forest and for land lending approvals for concessions within production forest and limited production forest (Jakarta Post 2012).

While the above policies help investors to access land for biofuel feedstock plantations, a number of other policies have also been established to provide economic incentives for investment in biofuel feedstocks. These include the following:
•• Minister of Finance Decree No. 117/PMK.06/2006 provides subsidized loans to farmers to help them develop biofuel plantations, primarily for oil palm.
•• Government Regulation No. 1/2007 stipulates that the biofuels industry is eligible for incentives including income tax reductions, accelerated depreciation and amortization, and a government guarantee against operational losses.
•• Minister of Finance Decree (No. 79/PMK.05/2007) enables small and medium-size enterprises to obtain subsidized financing for food and energy crops such as sugarcane, corn, sorghum and cassava. The decree was issued in order to get national banks to support government projects for food security and biofuel feedstocks.
•• Presidential Regulation No. 36/2010 encourages foreign investment in biofuel feedstocks by allowing foreign investors to hold 95% of the shares in oil palm and jatropha plantations. (Investors can only hold up to 49% of the shares in several other business investments in Indonesia.) This regulation offers foreign investors more security and greater returns on their investments. Foreign investors are still not able to hold 100% of the shares in a plantation because Law No. 18/2004, on estate crops, stipulates that they must establish joint ventures with Indonesian legal entities, and the Basic Agrarian Law stipulates that they cannot obtain full ownership (hak milik) of Indonesian land. Foreign investors can gain access to land in Indonesia via a right to use or hak pakai provided they have formed a joint venture with an Indonesian company.

Several policies have also been introduced to regulate the trade and commercial use of biofuels. The most significant include the following:
•• Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources regulation (No. 051/2006) provides potential investors with guidance on obtaining permission to produce, purchase, sell, export and import biofuels. It requires biodiesel companies to guarantee a continuous supply of biofuel for domestic needs. It also stipulates that permits are valid for up to 20 years and may be extended.
•• Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources egulation No. 32/2008, governing the production, trade and use of biofuels, specifies blending targets for the phased introduction of biofuels up to 2025 for transportation, industry and power generation. Heavy industries and other commercial sectors are required to use at least 5% biodiesel (in their total fuel consumption) by 2010, 10% by 2015 and 15% by 2020. Ethanol targets were set at 7% by 2010, 10% by 2015 and 12% by 2020. The regulation also provides fiscal and nonfiscal incentives for those who implement the phased mandatory use of biofuels.
•• Presidential Regulation No. 45/2009, concerning the procurement and distribution of biofuels, mandates the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources to determine the market price of petroleum and biofuels.
