Despite policies encouraging investment in bioenergy crops, limited growth is occurring in the sector and Indonesia has failed to meet its targets. This can be attributed to a number of factors including price fluctuations and competition with fossil fuels; competition with food crops; negative press coverage and resulting foreign policy restrictions; complicated land and permit application processes; land tenure issues and a lack of clarity over land ownership; poor infrastructure; limited access to technology and capital; and weak law enforcement.
In Indonesia, there is a strong belief that the biofuel sector, which depends primarily on palm oil, has been hindered by dramatically rising CPO prices and falling oil prices (Dillon et al. 2008; Dermawan et al. 2012), which have made palm-oil-based biofuels uncompetitive. High palm oil prices have also made palm-oil-based biodiesel production increasingly unprofitable. The bioethanol market has also been badly affected by prices.
High feedstock prices and limited government assistance left the biofuel industry floundering. Investors halted plans for new developments, and many existing biodiesel plants suspended their operations. Others reduced their production levels to as low as 10% of capacity. Even with record-high oil prices in 2008, biofuels were more expensive to produce than petroleum fuels and only added to the government’s fuel subsidy burden (Dillon et al. 2008).
The bioenergy sector has also encountered problems because concerns have been raised in the media and by nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and researchers about the security of food supplies in developing countries where bioenergy feedstocks are being cultivated (Monbiot 2007; Naylor et al. 2007; Runge and Senauer 2008; Matondi et al. 2011). These concerns have been based on the assumption that productive land and/or existing agricultural production may be diverted from food to bioenergy feedstocks and that the price of food would increase so that poor people could no longer afford to purchase it. Of particular concern was the potential pressure on the supplies of palm oil, sugarcane and cassava.
Nevertheless, the relatively slow development of the bioenergy sector in Indonesia is unlikely to have had an impact on domestic food supplies of sugar or CPO, especially since oil palm plantations are continuing to expand at an average annual rate of around 8% (Bisinfocus 2012). It has been estimated that less than 5% of total CPO production is being used for biodiesel (Winrock International 2009). Cassava and sugarcane plantation land has not expanded in Indonesia despite interest in the biofuel sector, and these crops are not yet used in Indonesian biofuel production.
The expansion of bioenergy feedstocks in forest-rich countries such as Indonesia has attracted criticism from NGOs and received attention from foreign and local news organizations (Naylor et al. 2007; WWF 2007; Koh and Wilcove 2008; Knudson 2009). Most criticism focuses on the claim that this trend is contributing to GHG emissions rather than reducing them. The calculation of exactly how much CO2 is produced in the manufacture of bioenergy is a complex process that needs to consider the following factors: •• land use change in the area where the feedstock is grown, •• transportation of the feedstock, •• processing of the feedstock into bioenergy, •• the efficiency of the feedstock compared with standard fuel.
Criticism of bioenergy development in forest-rich countries such as Indonesia has caused several countries to develop policies that may restrict imports of bioenergy originating from Indonesia.
While the government has released several regulations that aim to speed up plantation development in Indonesia, the process of acquiring land for plantations involves a number of bureaucratic hurdles and can take considerable time. Several permits need to be acquired before an investor can begin to plant bioenergy feedstock crops.
Bioenergy feedstock developments also need to comply with development plans (governed by Law No. 25/2004) and spatial plans outlining land use (governed by Law No. 26/2007). Spatial planning is an extremely political process in Indonesia, and it can take years for consensus over spatial plans to be reached. Land insecurity is prevalent when spatial plans are delayed and actors with competing interests cannot reach agreement on land allocations (Caroko et al. 2011).
Securing land for plantation developments has also been complicated by Indonesia’s decentralization process, which has sought to grant provincial and district governments greater authority to manage responsibilities previously under the control of the central government.
While decentralization was intended to increase efficiency, improve public service and empower local stakeholders, it has often discouraged investors because there has been an abundance of conflicting and overlapping licenses issued by local and central authorities. The licensing process has also become more costly, time consuming and inefficient because investors now have to acquire permits from more actors at the district and provincial levels (Casson et al. 2007a). Governors and district governments can now issue location permits and licenses for agriculture and bioenergy developments if they do not lie within the state owned forest; but if they do, the central government still has the authority to decide whether forest lands may be converted.
Investors must first secure approvals from provincial or district governments and then submit applications for forest conversion to the Ministry of Forestry (Caroko et al. 2011). It can be argued that these complicated permit systems have been established to protect Indonesia’s forests; however, permit issuing has long been associated with corruption, cronyism and bribes, and extended permit application processes tend to provide more opportunities for rent seeking.
Even if investors can navigate the complicated land application process and legally secure land for bioenergy feedstock development, they may still encounter problems on the ground because laws put in place to ensure that communities are consulted in large-scale plantation developments are not enforced or adhered to.10 This often results in considerable conflict when a company begins to clear land and establish a plantation.
Plantations and other concessions allocated for economic development initiatives, such as mining and logging, often overlap with customary lands and displace local people. This situation has often resulted in widespread conflict and hinders plantation targets and other developments.
The Indonesian bioenergy sector is also challenged by poor infrastructure such as roads, bridges, ports, and communication and electricity connections. This is particularly important for the oil palm industry, as fresh oil palm fruit has to be processed within 48 hours (Casson 1999).
Weak legal protections for local communities and lax enforcement of environmental regulations threaten to undermine the green credentials of Indonesia’s bioenergy feedstock plantations and other agricultural crops.
Enforcement and monitoring of large-scale agricultural crops, including bioenergy feedstocks, is challenging for the Indonesian government. Development frequently occurs in the outer reaches of the archipelago, where the official presence is limited and mapping is poor. Serious breaches of Indonesian law — including operating without a concession title, illegal clearing of forests, planting in national parks and intentional burning
